# Pipit: reactive systems in F*

## Reactive systems

[picture: car, train, plane, coffee machine]

Reactive systems are systems that must constantly react to changes in their environment, and they usually have strict deadlines on the latency.
In contrast to a program that computes a function and terminates -- a traditional compiler, for example -- reactive systems are usually expected to keep executing and responding to their environment indefinitely.

Such systems are everywhere, and many of them are safety-critical: cars, planes, trains, and motorcycles, are all reactive systems in some sense.

We can usually construct big reactive systems by composing together smaller reactive systems.
One such small reactive system is the driver that reliably extracts information from the accelerometer and gyroscope sensors in an autonomous vehicle.
Similar drivers also show up in less critical systems -- such as the wifi driver on my laptop.
Although these sorts of drivers only a small part of a safety-critical system, we could imagine 

## A sensor driver
These sorts of drivers are usually written in a low-level language such as C.
Let's have a look at an example of such a driver that tries to reads a temperature from a thermometer once per second, keeps track of when the last successful read was, and tries to reset the device after a certain number of failures.

```
sensor_driver() {
    int    age  = VALID_TIMEOUT;
    sample last = SAMPLE_INVALID;

    while (true) {
        sample s = sensor_read();

        if (SAMPLE_VALID(s)) {
            last = s;
            age  = 0;
        } else {
            age  = age + 1;
        }

        if (age >= VALID_TIMEOUT) {
            last = SAMPLE_INVALID;
        }
        broadcast(last);

        if (age == RESET_TIMEOUT) {
            sensor_reset();
        }
        sleep(1000ms);
    }
}
```

The program has a deliberate infinite loop. Once a second, we use `sensor_read` to read a sample from the sensor then check if it's valid.
If it's valid, we use it as our most recent valid sample.
Otherwise, we increment the age of the current sample.
If the last valid sample is too old, we mark it as invalid and use `broadcast` to tell the driver's consumers what we know about the current sensor state.
After a certain number of bad reads, we reset the sensor.
Finally, we sleep until the next second.

### Informal specification

We can state an informal property that our driver should satisfy:

> If the driver broadcasts a valid sample, then the sample corresponds to the most recent successful sensor reading

This is a fairly simple property, but how do we write it down?
What specification do we have to give to `sensor_read` and `sleep` to be able to prove this?
It's not totally clear how to thread the sensor readings and time through the rest of the system.


### Lifting the driver

One undesirable property of this implementation is that it kind of mixes everything together.
It's got the driver logic, which involves its own mutable state, as well as the job of actually talking to the hardware, all mixed up.
With this implementation, we can't state anything about the logic without also thinking about how we talk to the hardware.

Instead of trying to verify the C code directly, we'll try a different approach: we'll abstract the sensor logic to a pure function that abstractly specifies how to respond to messages from the hardware.
With this separation, the C code's only job is to facilitate the communication between the logic and the hardware.

We lift the logic to a stream function which takes a stream of sensor readings, and returns a stream of records: the first element describes which value to broadcast; the second describes whether to reset the sensor.

```
sensor_logic (sensor_read: stream sample):
    stream { broadcast: sample
           ; reset:     bool }
```

C doesn't have streams, so we have to encode it slightly to be able to call it.

```
sensor_driver() {
    sensor_logic_state state;
    sensor_logic_init(&state);

    while (true) {
        sample s = sensor_read();
        sensor_logic_result result = sensor_logic_step(s, &state);

        broadcast(result.broadcast);

        if (result.reset) {
            sensor_reset();
        }

        sleep(1000ms);
    }
}
```

We will verify the pure logic, but probably won't bother to verify the C code.
The goal here is to put as much logic as can fit in the pure streaming function, and make the C code as simple as possible so there's nothing interesting to verify.


### Logic as a streaming program

Finally, we'll lift up the logic of our driver to a streaming program.

```
sensor_logic  (sensor_read: stream sample) =
  let rec age =
    if SAMPLE_VALID sensor_read then 0
    else (VALID_TIMEOUT `fby` age)
  in
  let rec last =
    if SAMPLE_VALID sensor_read then sensor_read
    else if age < VALID_TIMEOUT then (SAMPLE_INVALID `fby` last)
    else SAMPLE_INVALID
  in
  let reset = age == RESET_TIMEOUT
  in { broadcast = last; reset = reset }
```

### A formal specification
Now that we've separated out the logic from the hardware, we can 
Our informal property from before is a bit easier to specify now.
We can write it down as something like:

```
spec =
    \forall sensor_read: stream sample.
    let { broadcast, reset } = sensor_logic sensor_read in
    \forall t. SAMPLE_VALID (broadcast @ t) ==>
        \exists t' <= t. broadcast @ t = sensor_read @ t'
```

We can be a little bit more precise:
```
spec =
    \forall sensor_read: stream sample.
    let { broadcast, reset } = sensor_logic sensor_read in
    \forall t. SAMPLE_VALID (broadcast @ t) ==>
        \exists t' <= t. broadcast @ t = sensor_read @ t'
        /\ \not \exists t'' > t'. SAMPLE_VALID (sensor_read @ t'')
```

However, we can specify it as a synchronous system instead.

```
latest_sample (s: stream sample): stream sample =
  let rec latest =
    if SAMPLE_VALID s then s
    else (SAMPLE_INVALID `fby` latest)
  in latest
```

```
spec (sensor_read: stream sample): stream bool =
    let { broadcast, reset } = sensor_broadcast sensor_read in
    check (SAMPLE_VALID broadcast ==> broadcast = latest sensor_read)
```

## Checking programs

```
run1 (f: stream 'a -> stream 'b): exp ['a] 'b

exp_valid (e: exp \Gamma \alpha) : prop

system_valid (sys: system \Gamma s \alpha): prop

check_exp (e: exp \Gamma \alpha) (system_valid (system_of_exp e)): exp_valid e
```

### Checking: normalisation

```
let sys = system_of_exp (run1 spec)

let valid: system_valid sys =
  assert (system_valid_induct_1_base sys)
    by Pipit.normalize_system
  assert (system_valid_induct_1_step sys)
    by Pipit.normalize_system

  system_valid_induct_1 sys
```

### A system
```
system_of_exp (XLet XRec .... )
==>
  system {
    init = (max_age, SAMPLE_INVALID, SAMPLE_INVALID);
    step = fun sr (age, bc, latest) (age', bc', latest') result.
        age' = (if SAMPLE_VALID(sr) then 0 else age) /\
        bc' = (if SAMPLE_VALID(sr) then sr else if age' < max_age then bc else SAMPLE_INVALID) /\
        latest' = (if SAMPLE_VALID(sr) then sr else latest) /\
        result = (SAMPLE_VALID(bc') ==> bc' = latest');
  }
     
```

### TCB
Pipit     ||  Velus        +      Kind2
OCaml     ||  OCaml               OCaml
F*        ||  Coq
Z3        ||                      Z3
          ||
F*->C     ||       shared semantics agree
(Karamel) ||                      Translation to transition systems
          ||
(+ remaining bits)||  (+ CompCert's TCB)

### Conclusion
* Verified translation to executable (embedded C) & relational LTS
* Real programs running on real µcs (coffee machine pic)
* no real verified programs yet (F)
* contracts + evaluation (in-progress)
* generative drivers: metaprogramming facilities
* clocks?

# Appendix

### A questionable specification
This driver is very simple, but if we want to verify it correct, it has some complexities.
The driver itself is sequential, but it runs concurrently with the sensor itself.
How do we specify `sensor_read` and `sleep`?

```
ghost now: nat;
ghost reading: nat -> sample;

sensor_read() { \result. result == reading[now] }
sleep(t) { now += t }
```

