readme.md, before:

# Pipit

Pipit is an embedded language for implementing and verifying *reactive systems*, such as the anti-lock braking system in a car, or the  [system that fills the water reservoir of your coffee machine](https://youtu.be/6IybbQFPOl8).
Pipit is a research project and is in the early stages of development.

Pipit is implemented in  [F\*](https://www.fstar-lang.org/).
The language is strongly inspired by Lustre.
The verification system is inspired by the [Kind2 model checker](https://github.com/kind2-mc/kind2/) and related work.
By embedding Pipit in a theorem prover, we aim to have an expressive language with a small verifiable core.
Pipit reuses F\*'s proof automation for proving properties of programs.
We also reuse F\*'s C code generation to generate real-time code.

The Pipit library is in the `src` subdirectory and has four main pieces:
* the source language, which provides some syntactic niceties for writing programs (`Pipit.Sugar`);
* the core expression language, which provides a bigstep semantics (`Pipit.Exp` and submodules);
* transition systems, which are used for reasoning about programs (`Pipit.System` and submodules); and
* executable systems, which are used for compiling to C code (`Pipit.System.Exec` and submodules).

Programs written in the core language are translated to a transition system for verification; this translation is verified (it preserves semantics).
The translation to executable systems preserves types, but is not yet verified to preserve semantics.
The details of the formalisation and proofs are available in the [implementation notes](src/readme.md).

There are examples available in the `example` subdirectory ([readme](example/readme.md)).

## Dependencies and development

Pipit requires F\* and Karamel for generating C code.
Pipit uses [opam](https://opam.ocaml.org/), the OCaml package manager.

Pipit requires a recent development version of F\*.
We maintain a fork with the right version at [https://github.com/songlarknet/FStar/tree/pipit](songlarknet/FStar).
This fork currently has some minor improvements to avoid duplication of work during code-generation, which we expect to be integrated upstream in the near future.

### Dependency installation

Before setting up a local development environment, make sure you have [opam](https://opam.ocaml.org/) and Python 2.7 installed.
If you are running a modern Linux distribution, such as the latest release of Ubuntu (23.04), you may need to [install Python 2.7 manually (see below)](#modern-linux-no-python-27).

The makefile target `make dev-init` will initialise a local development environment.
This target runs the following commands:
``` sh
# Make sure the opam index is up-to-date
opam update

# Create a local opam switch with OCaml 4.14
opam switch create . 4.14.1

# Tell opam to use the development version of F* but don't install it yet
opam pin add fstar git+https://github.com/songlarknet/FStar#pipit --no-action

# Tell opam where to find the local repo for Karamel and install it and F*
opam pin add karamel git+https://github.com/songlarknet/karamel#pipit --yes
```
#### Modern Linux (no Python 2.7)

The opam package for the Z3 SMT solver requires Python 2.7.
Unfortunately, the latest release of Ubuntu (23.04) no longer includes packages for Python 2.
I had the most luck installing from source.
Run the following in a temporary directory in which you'd like to build Python:

```
cd $TMP
wget https://www.python.org/ftp/python/2.7.16/Python-2.7.16.tgz
tar xvzf Python-2.7.16.tgz
cd Python-2.7.16
./configure --enable-optimizations
make -j8
sudo make install
```

Then, you can install Z3 and other dependencies as follows.
The `--no-depexts` flag is important: it tells opam not to care that the `python-2.7` apt package is missing.
```
cd $PIPIT
opam update
opam switch create . 4.14.1
opam pin add fstar --dev-repo --no-action
opam pin add karamel --dev-repo --yes --no-depexts
```

### IDE configuration

When using an IDE (Emacs, VSCode), you probably need to specify the exact version of FStar and Z3 binaries to use.


#### VSCode

There are a few VSCode extensions that provide different levels of F\* support; you should use [fstar-vscode-assistant](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=FStarLang.fstar-vscode-assistant).

If you are using a local `opam` switch, as described above, you may will to tell VSCode the path of your F\* installation.
Copy `template.fst.config.json` to `.fst.config.json`.

#### Emacs

To set up Emacs to use the local `opam` switch, I modified the global fstar options in Emacs.
I modified my `~/.doom.d/config.el` to include:

``` emacs-lisp
(setq-default
  fstar-executable "/Users/amos/proj/songlark/pipit/_opam/bin/fstar.exe"
  fstar-smt-executable "/Users/amos/proj/songlark/pipit/_opam/bin/z3"
  fstar-subp-prover-args
  '("--include" "/Users/amos/proj/songlark/pipit/src"
    "--include" "/Users/amos/proj/songlark/pipit/example"
    "--cache_dir" "/Users/amos/proj/songlark/pipit/build/cache"))
```

(Is it easy to set project-local options in Emacs? It would be convenient if the Emacs fstar-mode read `.fst.config.json` too.)

## Build instructions

Use `make verify` to check the proofs.
Use `make extract` to extract C code for the Pump example; the extracted C code is written to `build/extract`.
The embedded system that actually runs the Pump example is in the [app-pipit-pump repository](https://github.com/songlarknet/app-pipit-pump); it uses the Zephyr RTOS.

Commit message:

add note: makefile dev-init does not work

readme.md, after:

# Pipit

Pipit is an embedded language for implementing and verifying *reactive systems*, such as the anti-lock braking system in a car, or the  [system that fills the water reservoir of your coffee machine](https://youtu.be/6IybbQFPOl8).
Pipit is a research project and is in the early stages of development.

Pipit is implemented in  [F\*](https://www.fstar-lang.org/).
The language is strongly inspired by Lustre.
The verification system is inspired by the [Kind2 model checker](https://github.com/kind2-mc/kind2/) and related work.
By embedding Pipit in a theorem prover, we aim to have an expressive language with a small verifiable core.
Pipit reuses F\*'s proof automation for proving properties of programs.
We also reuse F\*'s C code generation to generate real-time code.

The Pipit library is in the `src` subdirectory and has four main pieces:
* the source language, which provides some syntactic niceties for writing programs (`Pipit.Sugar`);
* the core expression language, which provides a bigstep semantics (`Pipit.Exp` and submodules);
* transition systems, which are used for reasoning about programs (`Pipit.System` and submodules); and
* executable systems, which are used for compiling to C code (`Pipit.System.Exec` and submodules).

Programs written in the core language are translated to a transition system for verification; this translation is verified (it preserves semantics).
The translation to executable systems preserves types, but is not yet verified to preserve semantics.
The details of the formalisation and proofs are available in the [implementation notes](src/readme.md).

There are examples available in the `example` subdirectory ([readme](example/readme.md)).

## Dependencies and development

Pipit requires F\* and Karamel for generating C code.
Pipit uses [opam](https://opam.ocaml.org/), the OCaml package manager.

Pipit requires a recent development version of F\*.
We maintain a fork with the right version at [https://github.com/songlarknet/FStar/tree/pipit](songlarknet/FStar).
This fork currently has some minor improvements to avoid duplication of work during code-generation, which we expect to be integrated upstream in the near future.

### Dependency installation

Before setting up a local development environment, make sure you have [opam](https://opam.ocaml.org/) and Python 2.7 installed.
If you are running a modern Linux distribution, such as the latest release of Ubuntu (23.04), you may need to [install Python 2.7 manually (see below)](#modern-linux-no-python-27).

~~The makefile target `make dev-init` will initialise a local development environment.~~
(The makefile target doesn't work if you don't already have fstar installed. Instead run the following:)
This target runs the following commands:
``` sh
# Make sure the opam index is up-to-date
opam update

# Create a local opam switch with OCaml 4.14
opam switch create . 4.14.1

# Tell opam to use the development version of F* but don't install it yet
opam pin add fstar git+https://github.com/songlarknet/FStar#pipit --no-action

# Tell opam where to find the local repo for Karamel and install it and F*
opam pin add karamel git+https://github.com/songlarknet/karamel#pipit --yes
```
#### Modern Linux (no Python 2.7)

The opam package for the Z3 SMT solver requires Python 2.7.
Unfortunately, the latest release of Ubuntu (23.04) no longer includes packages for Python 2.
I had the most luck installing from source.
Run the following in a temporary directory in which you'd like to build Python:

```
cd $TMP
wget https://www.python.org/ftp/python/2.7.16/Python-2.7.16.tgz
tar xvzf Python-2.7.16.tgz
cd Python-2.7.16
./configure --enable-optimizations
make -j8
sudo make install
```

Then, you can install Z3 and other dependencies as follows.
The `--no-depexts` flag is important: it tells opam not to care that the `python-2.7` apt package is missing.
```
cd $PIPIT
opam update
opam switch create . 4.14.1
opam pin add fstar --dev-repo --no-action
opam pin add karamel --dev-repo --yes --no-depexts
```

### IDE configuration

When using an IDE (Emacs, VSCode), you probably need to specify the exact version of FStar and Z3 binaries to use.


#### VSCode

There are a few VSCode extensions that provide different levels of F\* support; you should use [fstar-vscode-assistant](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=FStarLang.fstar-vscode-assistant).

If you are using a local `opam` switch, as described above, you may will to tell VSCode the path of your F\* installation.
Copy `template.fst.config.json` to `.fst.config.json`.

#### Emacs

To set up Emacs to use the local `opam` switch, I modified the global fstar options in Emacs.
I modified my `~/.doom.d/config.el` to include:

``` emacs-lisp
(setq-default
  fstar-executable "/Users/amos/proj/songlark/pipit/_opam/bin/fstar.exe"
  fstar-smt-executable "/Users/amos/proj/songlark/pipit/_opam/bin/z3"
  fstar-subp-prover-args
  '("--include" "/Users/amos/proj/songlark/pipit/src"
    "--include" "/Users/amos/proj/songlark/pipit/example"
    "--cache_dir" "/Users/amos/proj/songlark/pipit/build/cache"))
```

(Is it easy to set project-local options in Emacs? It would be convenient if the Emacs fstar-mode read `.fst.config.json` too.)

## Build instructions

Use `make verify` to check the proofs.
Use `make extract` to extract C code for the Pump example; the extracted C code is written to `build/extract`.
The embedded system that actually runs the Pump example is in the [app-pipit-pump repository](https://github.com/songlarknet/app-pipit-pump); it uses the Zephyr RTOS.
